[MRG] Update software section (#27)
bluegenes/2020-gep: sequencing_roadmap.tex

Workflow automation can be conducted by scripting the ordered execution of each step in a language such as bash.
While command line scripting is an effective solution to coordinate and execute a workflow, workflows automated in this way do not take advantage of the built-in infrastructure in workflow systems.
In our experience, it is more difficult to identify partially-completed workflow steps that produced truncated files, to rerun specific steps in a workflow, and to add additional files to a workflow when using bash scripting.

> These shortcomings are magnified when executing workflows on large-scale sequencing data sets.

Reviewer: datasets vs data sets?

https://twitter.com/randal_olson/status/824702008007557121?lang=en 🙃

> These shortcomings are magnified when executing workflows on large-scale sequencing data sets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These shortcomings are magnified when executing workflows on large-scale sequencing datasets.
```

\subsection*{Wrangling Scientific Software} 

> Most workflows rely on many pieces of software to generate final results.

Reviewer: most ...many.  this sentence is too general

Author: ```suggestion
Most workflows rely on multiple software packages to generate final results.
```

> Bioinformatics research software is heterogenous, where different tools are written by different research groups, in different languages, and with different target audiences.

Reviewer: yes, like this change!

Reviewer: though maybe too many instances of "different"

Author: ```suggestion
Bioinformatics research software is heterogeneous, where tools are written by different research groups, in different languages, and with varied target audiences.
```

Reviewer: it'll do!

Each program has a number of other programs it depends upon to function (``dependencies"), and as software changes over time to meet research needs, the results may change, even when run with identical parameters. 
As a result, it is critical to take an organized approach to installing, managing, and keeping track of software and software versions. 
To meet this need, most workflow managers integrate with software management systems like conda, singularity, and docker \cite{analyticsconda, kurtzer2017singularity, merkel2014docker}.

Software management systems perform some combination of software installation, management, and packaging that alleviate problems that arise from dependencies and that facilitate documentation of software versions.
Conda has a emerged as the leading software installation and management solution (\textbf{Figure \ref{fig:conda_figure}}). 
Conda is a package management and environment management system that allows users to install and organize software.
By enabling installation of software from many languages and disciplines, and managing dependency needs and conflicts for those installations, conda brought about a revolution in package management.

> Although portions of conda may eventually be superceded by alternative solutions (e.g. https://github.com/QuantStack/mamba), the model of software installation and management established by conda will likely remain.

Reviewer: yay, thanks for adding this!

Conda installations work across Linux, Mac, and Windows, though some packages are limited to certain operating systems.

To enable conda installation, software developers write a conda ``recipe" for their package which specifies any required dependencies, including which versions (or ranges of versions) will work.
During installation, conda checks for a compatible version of each dependency (and installs those dependencies for you, if desired). 
Since each package has a recipe, conda can follow the recipe for each dependency to ensure all required software is installed.
%in large part due to the massive uptake by the scientific community.

However, conda installation has a major limitation. 
When many packages are installed together, the time required to avoid version conflicts (``solve the environment”) can increase dramatically, as conda must check compatibility and install the correct version of each tool. 
To circumvent high solve times while also avoiding version conflicts that may arise during system-wide software installation, we recommend using separate ``environments" for your software and building many simple environments to accommodate different steps in your workflow. 

> Small environments might consist of just a few programs typically run together, installed directly from the command line, or from an environment file (in YAML format) that contains the information for each desired package. 

Reviewer: "use small environments" is the only part I'd like to add back _somewhere_

Author: ooo i agree. not sure where to add this right off the bat. any ideas, or should i add an issue about this?

Author: I added something to the caption below to include this information, let me know what you think!

Reviewer: love it

> \textbf{A. Conda Recipe Repositories} Each program distributed via Conda has a ``recipe" describing all software dependencies needed for Conda installation ( each of which must also be installable via conda). These are stored and managed in separate ``channels", some of which specialize (e.g. ``bioconda" specializes in bioinformatic software, ``r" specializes in R language packages) \cite{gruning2018bioconda}. \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\textbf{A. Conda Recipe Repositories} Each program distributed via Conda has a ``recipe" describing all software dependencies needed for Conda installation (each of which must also be installable via conda). These are stored and managed in separate ``channels", some of which specialize (e.g. ``bioconda" specializes in bioinformatic software, ``r" specializes in R language packages) \cite{gruning2018bioconda}. \\
```

> \textbf{B. Use Conda Environments to Avoid Installation Conflicts}  Conda does not require root privileges for software installation, thus enabling use by researchers working on shared cluster systems. However, even user-based software installation can encounter dependency conflicts. For example, you might need to use python2 to install and run a program (e.g. older scripts written by members of your lab), while also using snakemake to execute your workflows (requires python$\geq$3.5). By installing each program into an isolated ``environment" that contains only the software required to run that program, you can ensure all programs will run without issue. Conda virtual environments can be created and installed either on the command line, or via an environment YAML file, as shown. In this case, the environment file also specifies which Conda channels to search and download programs from. When specified in a YAML file, conda environments are easily transferable between computers and operating systems. Further, because the version of each package installed in an environment is recorded, workflow reproducibility is enhanced.   

Author: ```suggestion
\textbf{B. Use Conda Environments to Avoid Installation Conflicts}  Conda does not require root privileges for software installation, thus enabling use by researchers working on shared cluster systems. However, even user-based software installation can encounter dependency conflicts. For example, you might need to use python2 to install and run a program (e.g. older scripts written by members of your lab), while also using snakemake to execute your workflows (requires python$\geq$3.5). By installing each program into an isolated ``environment" that contains only the software required to run that program, you can ensure all programs will run without issue. Using small, separate environments for your software and building many simple environments to accommodate different steps in your workflow also reduces the amount of time it takes conda to resolve dependency conflicts between different software tools (e.g. ``solve" an environment). Conda virtual environments can be created and installed either on the command line, or via an environment YAML file, as shown. In this case, the environment file also specifies which Conda channels to search and download programs from. When specified in a YAML file, conda environments are easily transferable between computers and operating systems. Further, because the version of each package installed in an environment is recorded, workflow reproducibility is enhanced.   
```

Reviewer: yes, I like it! The `solve` env bit actually doesn't need `e.g.`, otherwise good.

Reviewer: @taylorreiter this is the only bit that needs a change - otherwise ready to merge!

> \textbf{B. Use Conda Environments to Avoid Installation Conflicts}  Conda does not require root privileges for software installation, thus enabling use by researchers working on shared cluster systems. However, even user-based software installation can encounter dependency conflicts. For example, you might need to use python2 to install and run a program (e.g. older scripts written by members of your lab), while also using snakemake to execute your workflows (requires python$\geq$3.5). By installing each program into an isolated ``environment" that contains only the software required to run that program, you can ensure all programs will run without issue. Conda virtual environments can be created and installed either on the command line, or via an environment YAML file, as shown. In this case, the environment file also specifies which Conda channels to search and download programs from. When specified in a YAML file, conda environments are easily transferable between computers and operating systems. Further, because the version of each package installed in an environment is recorded, workflow reproducibility is enhanced.   

Reviewer: great additions! also thanks for fixing the special char
